# 'Reading Machines' - Response to Ramsey's Ideas of Algorithmic Criticism

  In the field of humanities and its digital counterpart, there are many new ways to review the media within the field. Stephen Ramsey discussed a new way of text analysis in his book ‘Reading Machines’. In chapter one of the book, Ramsey discussed the idea of Algorithmic Criticism. The proposal of algorithmic criticism is to use an algorithm to find a pattern within the text to understand its value. There are a few arguments Ramsey brought forward. The first being that many scholars have denounced algorithmic criticism. The second argument relates to the first since it explains the thinking behind the scholars who are skeptical. The mindset is literary criticism does not need numerical values to derive meaning from text. The third argument is algorithmic criticism will require a new audience for it to gain popularity and recognition. The arguments related to each other and it created a cohesive reading to further study. 

  Many scholars will not recognize algorithm criticism because it seems to add a numerical value to a media that does not generally accept it. It does seem rather weird to add numbers to words that a human being should mentally add value to themselves. Usually, Humanities is an area that dwells in the opinions of others and their reasoning behind what they think. It makes complete sense for Ramsey to write “But "algorithmic criticism" - criticism derived from algorithmic manipulation of text - either does not exist or exists only in nascent form.” Many scholars want to manually review a text to find what that work means to them. Algorithmic criticism will typically find what the meaning of the work is to the author and how their style of writing affects their message. 

  Literary criticism is the analysis a person performs on a text. Scholars will typically state their opinion on a text and what it means to them. Since it is an opinionated piece with evidence drawn from the text, any resources involving numeric values is not needed. Ramsey explains this by stating, “Literary criticism operates within a hermeneutical framework in which the specifically scientific meaning of fact, metric, verification, and evidence simply do not apply.” The analysis in the literary sense is derived from feeling so having a scientific value would be odd. For this reason, Ramsey believes that a new audience of scholars will be needed for algorithm criticism to become distinguished. A new audience of scholars willing to use scientific values or data will demonstrate how this criticism can work for text analysis. 

  I agree with Ramsey’s arguments and his belief that algorithmic criticism is a new way to analyze text. However, I believe that this criticism can be applied further to other media. I think other media such as creative writing and design would benefit from algorithmic criticism because there are certain patterns that apply to them. In Jerome McGann’s and Lisa Samuels’ writing ‘Deformance and Interpretation’, they discuss different ways to analyze poetry by dissecting them into algorithms. “This section focuses instead on poetic deformations, which we have so far organized into four types: reordered (for example, reading backward), isolating (for example, reading only verbs or other parts of speech), altering (exteriorizing variants--potential versions--of words in the work; or altering the spatial organization, typography, or punctuation of a work), and adding (perhaps the most subjective of our deformative poetics).” They used different algorithms to break down the poem into different forms and found different values from each alogithrum. 
  
  [https://github.com/RachelRuskoff/IASC-2P02/blob/master/Images/Voyant.PNG]
  
  I used another algorithm in the same poem McGann and Samuels used in their writing, ‘The Search for Sound Free from Motion’ by Wallace Stevens. The voyant tool showed the vocabulary desinty, the average word per sentence and the most frequent words used. From this information, many attributes about the author can be deduced such as their style of writing, their use of vocabulary and the pattern they used in the poem. More can be learned about the author with this concept visual of an algorithm since it shows what they include in their thoughts. Voyant shows how algorithms can be used visually while deriving information from text. I think algorithmic criticism can be used with and without textual attributes to display new information about media.
  
  Other forms of media can benefit from critical patterns or rules to create an interrelated design. Algorithms can be used to determine the best aesthetic for designs. Using an algorithm that was made to show the best design possible would assist developers to see how they should produce their project. George Stiny and James Gips explained how algorithmic criticism can benefit designers and artists in their book, ‘Algorithmic Aesthetics: Computer Models for Criticism and Design in The Arts’. Stiny and Gips Explain, “The process of criticizing or designing a work of art can be very complicated and can involve a full range of mental abilities. The ability to specify a criticism algorithm or a design algorithm may well presuppose the ability to formalize a wide range of perceptual and cognitive skills and a wide range of knowledge.”
    
  For digital humanities students, this will be very beneficial. Students can use algorithms to establish their designs and then improve on the weaknesses the algorithm identifies. Algorithmic criticism can be used for visualizations to dissect the aesthetic posed by the design. Aspects of visuals or other texts to be identified could be the appeal, theme, and emotions that provoke an audience. These features could be part of the algorithm to critique the design or text. The use of algorithms in writing and design can show beyond what is understood about creativity and the impacts of the human mind on technology. Ramsey’s idea of algorithms is very constructive to text analysis and within the digital humanities. Eventually, algorithmic criticism can be used for so much more to impact the next generations of designers and scholars.


# Resources

Ramsay, Stephen. Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism. University of Illinois Press, 2012.

McGann, Jerome, and Lisa Samuels. Deformance and Interpretation.

Stevens, Wallace. The Collected Poems of Wallace Stevens. 1942.

Stiny, George, and James Gips. Algorithmic Aesthetics: Computer Models for Criticism and Design in the Arts. Berkeley: University of California Press.


